docs: putting test into each chapter of the tutorial (#1647)
canonical/operator: docs/tutorial/from-zero-to-hero-write-your-first-kubernetes-charm/integrate-your-charm-with-postgresql.md

Congratulations, your relation with PostgreSQL is functional!

> ## Add unit tests for your charm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Write unit tests
```

Now that our charm will extract the database authentication data and endpoints information from the relation data in function `fetch_postgres_relation_data`, we can add a test case to cover this scenario. In the test case, we create a relation and set it in the input state; on the relation-changed event, the database information should be extracted and set as environment variables for our `fastapi-service`:

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should also add a note here pointing out that we are not testing the `fetch_postgres_relation_data` function directly, we're checking that the response to a Juju event is what it should be? To help people understand the level at which Scenario testing is done.

> Now that our charm will extract the database authentication data and endpoints information from the relation data in function `fetch_postgres_relation_data`, we can add a test case to cover this scenario. Here, we are not testing the `fetch_postgres_relation_data` function directly, but rather, we are checking that the response to a Juju event is what it should be. So, in the test case, we create a relation and set it in the input state; on the relation-changed event, the database information should be extracted and set as environment variables for our `fastapi-service`:

Reviewer: I think the last sentence makes the paragraph harder to read, and I think it doesn't add much over just reading the code.

```suggestion
Now that our charm uses `fetch_postgres_relation_data` to extract database authentication data and endpoint information from the relation data, we should write a test for the feature. Here, we're not testing the `fetch_postgres_relation_data` function directly, but rather, we're checking that the response to a Juju event is what it should be:
```

```python
def test_relation_data():
    ctx = testing.Context(FastAPIDemoCharm)
    relation = testing.Relation(
        endpoint="database",
        interface="postgresql_client",
        remote_app_name="postgresql-k8s",
        remote_app_data={
            "endpoints": "example.com:5432",
            "username": "foo",
            "password": "bar",
        },
    )
    container = testing.Container(name="demo-server", can_connect=True)
    state_in = testing.State(
        containers={container},
        relations={relation},
        leader=True,
    )

    ctx.run(ctx.on.relation_changed(relation), state_in)

    assert container.layers["fastapi_demo"].services["fastapi-service"].environment == {
        "DEMO_SERVER_DB_HOST": "example.com",
        "DEMO_SERVER_DB_PORT": "5432",
        "DEMO_SERVER_DB_USER": "foo",
        "DEMO_SERVER_DB_PASSWORD": "bar",
    }
```

> In this chapter, we have also defined a new method `_on_collect_status` that checks various things including if the required database relation is there or not. If not, we wait for the database relation and set it to the blocked status. We can also add a test case to cover this scenario by not setting a relation in the input state and assert the unit status is blocked:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter, we also defined a new method `_on_collect_status` that checks various things, including whether the required database relation exists. If the relation doesn't exist, we wait and set the unit status to `blocked`. We can also add a test to cover this behaviour:
```

```python
def test_no_database_blocked():
    ctx = testing.Context(FastAPIDemoCharm)
    container = testing.Container(name="demo-server", can_connect=True)
    state_in = testing.State(
        containers={container},
        leader=True,
    )

    state_out = ctx.run(ctx.on.collect_unit_status(), state_in)

>     assert state_out.unit_status == ops.BlockedStatus("Waiting for database relation")

Reviewer 2: Technically, we tell people to compare to `testing.BlockedStatus("...")` but the above will work, and I'm still not convinced that adding all the classes in `testing` was a good idea, so I'm fine if we stick with this, even though it's not exactly what we say to do elsewhere.

Author: To be consistent with other docs (and `test_testing.py`, I will update this to `testing.FooStatus`. I will do the same in the `juju-sdk-tutorial-k8s` PR.

>     )

Reviewer: I think adding a comment here is more useful than explaining it above using words. I suppose this comment would need to be added to the tutorial repo too.

```suggestion
    )  # We've omitted relation data from the input state.
```

```

Run `tox -e unit` to make sure all test cases pass.

> ## Add integration tests for your charm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Write an integration test
```

> Now that our charm integrates with the PostgreSQL database, without a database integration, the app will be in the blocked status instead of active, because it requires a database relation. Let's tweak our existing integration test case `test_build_and_deploy` accordingly:

Reviewer 2: It's probably easier on people if we say what we're changing here (it's just the `raise_on_blocked` I think?). There is the comment in the code, but that isn't as immediately obvious as saying something in the text.

> Now that our charm integrates with the PostgreSQL database, without a database integration, the app will be in the blocked status instead of active, because it requires a database relation. Let's tweak our existing integration test case `test_build_and_deploy` accordingly and set the expected status as `blocked` in `ops_test.model.wait_for_idle`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that our charm integrates with the PostgreSQL database, if there's not a database relation, the app will be in `blocked` status instead of `active`. Let's tweak our existing integration test `test_build_and_deploy` accordingly, setting the expected status as `blocked` in `ops_test.model.wait_for_idle`:
```

```python
async def test_build_and_deploy(ops_test: OpsTest):
    """Build the charm-under-test and deploy it together with related charms.

    Assert on the unit status before any relations/configurations take place.
    """
    # Build and deploy charm from local source folder
    charm = await ops_test.build_charm(".")
    resources = {
        "demo-server-image": METADATA["resources"]["demo-server-image"]["upstream-source"]
    }

    # Deploy the charm and wait for blocked/idle status
    # The app will not be in active status as this requires a database relation
    await asyncio.gather(
        ops_test.model.deploy(charm, resources=resources, application_name=APP_NAME),
        ops_test.model.wait_for_idle(
            apps=[APP_NAME], status="blocked", raise_on_blocked=False, timeout=300
        ),
    )
```

> Then, let's add another test case to check the integration is successful. For that, we need to deploy a database to the test cluster and integrate both applications. If everything works as intendedFinally, we should check that the charm reports an active status.

Reviewer 2: "works as intended" and "Finally, we should" are smooshed up together :)

In your `tests/integration/test_charm.py` file add the following test case:

```python
@pytest.mark.abort_on_fail
async def test_database_integration(ops_test: OpsTest):
    """Verify that the charm integrates with the database.

    Assert that the charm is active if the integration is established.
    """
    await ops_test.model.deploy(
        application_name="postgresql-k8s",
        entity_url="postgresql-k8s",
        channel="14/stable",
    )
    await ops_test.model.integrate(f"{APP_NAME}", "postgresql-k8s")
    await ops_test.model.wait_for_idle(
        apps=[APP_NAME], status="active", raise_on_blocked=False, timeout=300
    )

```

```{important}

> But if you run the one and then the other (as separate `pytest ...` invocations, then two separate models will be created unless you pass `--model=some-existing-model` to inform pytest-operator to use a model you provide.

Reviewer 2: This shouldn't start with "but" as it's not clear what it's referring to. I think you can just leave that out and start with "If you run one test and then the other as separate `pytest ...` invocations, then ...".

```

In your Multipass Ubuntu VM, run the test again:

```text
ubuntu@charm-dev:~/fastapi-demo$ tox -e integration
```

The test may again take some time to run.

```{tip}

> **Pro tip:** To make things faster, use the `--model=<existing model name>` to inform `pytest-operator` to use the model it has created for the first test. Otherwise, charmers often have a way to cache their pack or deploy results; an example is [spellbook](https://github.com/canonical/spellbook).

Reviewer 2: Dima made a suggestion in another PR to get rid of spellbook here - I think that's reasonable. Also, I don't think we need the "Pro tip" bit when this is already in a tip box.

```suggestion
To make things faster, use the `--model=<existing model name>` to inform `pytest-operator` to use the model it has created for the first test. Otherwise, charmers often have a way to cache their pack or deploy results.
```
